William M. Peaster
29 April 2013

Donne’s Doctrinal Heterogeneity in the “Holy Sonnets”

	The beginning of seventeenth century was a time of very contentious religious debate in 
England and Europe. John Donne, having been born in London in 1572 to an ardently Roman 
Catholic family, was particularly destined to be in the midst of these sustained theological 
debates, as there was no way around the “anti-Catholic sentiment” that abounded in England at 
the time of his birth (Jokinen). Initially, Donne was strong in his faith: he came to refuse degrees 
from the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge as he would not relinquish his 
allegiance to Catholicism, which was a prerequisite for graduation (Jokinen). However, when 
Donne’s brother died in prison in 1593 for merely providing refuge to a Catholic priest, Donne 
began to question his religion and eventually as the years progressed he renounced his 
Catholicism in favor of Anglicanism (Jokinen). In many ways, Donne’s theological life can be 
described as contradictory and paradoxical. He was raised “a Catholic and ended up a High 
Anglican, a Laudian whose sermons were hissed at by Puritan[s]” (Stachniewski 27). Likewise, 
as will be revealed through a close examination of the “Holy Sonnets,” Donne seems to equally 
entertain elements of Calvinist and Arminian theology, which were doctrinally antithetical in 
more ways than one. What to make of these paradoxical, disparate doctrinal combinations?  I 
believe Donne’s contradictory personal religiosity illuminates just how great of a philosophical 
and religious thinker Donne truly was, for no one dogma could contain his genius, no single 
orthodoxy. Donne is already renowned worldwide as one of the greatest poets in all of history, 
and I believe the paradoxical nature of his personal religiosity only cements his uniqueness and 
profundity. In many ways, his personal religiosity is composed quite similarly to the 
metaphysical poetry that he has become so famous for: completely disparate elements are yoked 
together, complexity abounds, and beneath the surface there lies great layered depths. Donne’s 
personal theology does not uniformly adhere to any one Christian institution or orthodoxy, but is 
the composition of a mixed variety of Anglican, Catholic, Arminian, and Calvinist beliefs. 
Through close inspection of several of Donne’s Westmoreland “Holy Sonnets,” I intend to 
illuminate the multiplicitous, paradoxical, and sometimes even contradictory doctrinal nature of 
Donne’s personal religiosity.

	With a quick ascension through the priesthood after being ordained a minister of the 
Church of England in 1615, Donne is most widely known contemporarily as having been a High 
Anglican, and evidence of his Anglicanism can certainly be discerned in the Westmoreland Holy 
Sonnets. For example, Donne claims the necessity of the Anglican doctrine of contrition for 
achieving grace in Holy Sonnet IV, “Oh my black Soule! now thou art summoned” (Peterson 7). 
The Anglican notion of contrition is a pursuit of grace through “a sorrow of soul and 
a hatred of sin committed, with a firm purpose of not sinning in the future,” as it is an offense to 

God, which ideologically is in direct contrast with Catholicism’s notion of attrition, or the belief 
that hatred of sin due to the fear of hell or God’s power is valid enough for grace (Hanna). In 
“Oh my black Soule,” Donne alludes to Anglican contrition:		

			But who shall give thee that grace to beginner?			
      
			Oh make thy selfe with holy mourning blacke,	
      
			And red with blushing, as thou art with sinne;

								(Donne 11-12)	

	Donne suggests to not merely rely on attrition for salvation, otherwise known as 
imperfect contrition (as it arises from fear of God and not from a love for God), but to take one’s 
worship to the next necessary level of holiness by hating and repenting sin as an affront to a God 
whom is genuinely loved by the sinner (Peterson 7). The phrases “Holy mourning blacke” and 
“red with blushing” suggest that Donne believes the sinner who repents should be sincerely 
mournful in their repentance, as opposed to merely repenting out of terror at the penalty of hell 
(Peterson 7). The last two lines of “Oh my black Soule” go on to echo the Anglican notion of the 
Eucharist, or “Real Presence”: 

			Or wash thee in Christ’s blood, which hath this might

			That being red, it dyes red soules to white.

									(Donne 13-14). 

	This final couplet of the poem advocates the redemptive quality of “Christ’s blood,” and 
that by partaking in its cleansing qualities (i.e. Holy Communion, Mass), one’s soul is wholly 
purified and made “white” (McNees 19). Donne’s Holy Sonnet VII, “At the round earths 
imagin’d corners, blow,” also makes reference to the Anglican eucharistic Real Presence:

					… here on this lowly ground,

			Teach mee to repent; for that’s as good

			As if thou’hadst seal’d my pardon, with thy blood. 

									(Donne 12-14)

	Here Donne proposes one of two redemptive options to the Christian worshipper. One 
must either secure salvation through the heartfelt repentence of all sins (through perfect 
contrition), or secure it through participation in the sacrament that is the Holy Communion 
(Peterson 8). In Holy Sonnet X, “Death be not proud, though some have called thee,” Donne 
seems to be decrying the validity of Catholic attrition (as opposed to Anglican contrition), in that 
within the poem, the fear of death serves as synecdoche for the fear of the uncertainty of what 
comes after death (i.e. the possibility of damnation):

			Death be not proud, though some have called thee

			Mighty and dreadfull, for, thou art no soe …

									(Donne 1-2)

	In these first lines of the poem, Donne denies death as an acceptable motive of fear, and 
consequently, denies the validity of using attrition for salvation by sub-textually implying that 
one need not fear death if they are strong in their faith and if they repent diligently out of 
detestation of sin and out of a genuine love for God (Peterson 8). In this sense, “Death be not 
proud” indirectly suggests the primacy of contrition over attrition, for through faithful contrition 
death is conquered:

			… why swell’st thou then?

			One short sleepe past, wee wake eternally,

			And death shall be no more; death, thou shalt die.

									(Donne 13-14)

	The doctrine of contrition and the eucharistic Real Presence of Anglican theology are two 
elements of Donne’s personal religiosity that can be discerned from close inspection of his “Holy 
Sonnets.”

	While Donne denies various Catholic doctrines such as that of attrition, as he is an 
adherent to Anglican contrition, he still seems to have an affinity for certain elements of 
Catholicism, as evidenced by a few examples within the “Holy Sonnets.” In her article 
“Experimental Predestination in Donne’s Holy Sonnets: Self-Ministry and the Early 
Seventeenth-Century ‘Via Media,’” Catherine Martin claims that “despite [Anglican’s] distaste 
for the ‘grosser’ errors of the Roman Church, most [Anglicans] did not consider [Catholicism] 
entirely false and even maintained an invisible elite existed within it” (Martin 28). This would 
seem to be especially true of Donne, for he was raised Roman Catholic and was educated by 
Jesuits, eventually moving on to Anglicanism for career purposes but never fully escaping 
Catholicism’s influence (Rouziek 9). In Holy Sonnet VIII, “If faithfull soules be alike glorifi’d,” 
Donne asserts his Catholic father as one of these “invisible elite”: 

			If faithfull soules be alike glorifi’d

			As Angels, then my father’s soul doth see,	

			And adds this even to full felicitie … 

									(Donne 1-4)	


	While this sonnet’s opening seems to be making an allusion to Catholicism’s “veneration 
of the saints,” here Donne also seems to accept both Catholicism and Protestantism as being 
capable of harboring “faithfull soules” (Rouziek 19). In fact, though Donne is widely known for 
his Anglicanism, he greatly favored the Catholic dogma that any soul can be saved if they repent 
and accept Christ as their lord and savior; this tenet is in direct contrast to the popular Protestant 
Calvinist belief of the day that souls are “elected” by God for salvation and that their individual 
works have no bearing on their salvation (Calvinism). Evidence of this Catholic and anti-
Calvinist belief can be found in Holy Sonnet IV, “Oh my blacke Soule”: 

			But damn’d and hal’d to execution, 

			Wisheth that still he might be imprisoned.

			Yet grace, if thou repent, thou canst not lacke;

									(Donne 7-9)

	While Calvinist influence is undeniable throughout many of Donne’s “Holy Sonnets,” 
line nine of “Oh my blacke Soule” is a direct refutation of the Calvinist tenet of unconditional 
election, instead arguing in favor of the Catholic (and even Arminian) belief that all souls can 
have a stake in their salvation through repentence (Strier 15). Another belief that is nearly 
exclusive to Roman Catholicism is mentioned in Holy Sonnet XVII, “Since she whom I lov’d hat 
payd her last debt.” Donne speaks of God’s possible jealousy:

			And dost not only fear least I allow

			My Love to Saints and Angels things divine,

			But in thy tender jealousy dost doubt

			Least in the World.”

								(Donne 11-14)

	Donne proposes that God might potentially be jealous of his “Love to Saints and 
Angels,” with the veneration of “Saints and Angels” being of a particularly Catholic influence 
(Rouziek 20). While this might seem antithetical to Donne’s Anglicanism, time and again 
throughout the “Holy Sonnets” there occurs a paradoxical mixing of contrasting theologies that 
suggests a desire on Donne’s part to synthesize the best traditions of the theologies of the day 
into one personal heterogeneous religiosity (Rouziek 11). However, with regards to salvation, it 
is certain that Donne clearly favored the Catholic church’s tendency towards inclusiveness (i. e. 
salvation to any who repent) as opposed to the rigid unconditional election of Calvinism 
(Rouziek 5). Evidence of this can be found in the final couplet of Holy Sonnet XVIII, “Show me 
deare Christ, thy Spouse, so bright and clear,” where Donne’s “mild Dove” is a metaphor for the 
Christian church:  

			And let myne amorous soule court thy mild Dove,

			Who is most trew, and pleasing to thee, then

			When she’is embrac’d and open to most men.

						(Donne 13-14). 

	Donne’s affinity for Catholicism’s veneration of saints and the Church of Rome’s 
inclusiveness regarding salvation are two elements of Donne’s personal religiosity that likely 
lingered from his youthful upbringing, and can be recognized from a close inspection of his 
“Holy Sonnets.”

	Calvinist theology was extremely influential in the Church of England in the early 
seventeenth century, and likewise, evidence of its residual influence on Donne can be found 
throughout the “Holy Sonnets.” In fact, in his article “John Donne: The Despair of the ‘Holy 
Sonnets,’” John Stachniewski claims that “an accurate historical grasp of the period in which 
most of the sonnets are now thought to have been written should tell us that Calvinism was, at 
that time, the Anglican orthodoxy” (Stachniewski 22). In Donne’s Holy Sonnet II, “As due by 
many titles I resigne,” Donne works through the Calvinist notions that God loves mankind but 
not all the individuals of mankind, and that only a select few have been “elected” for salvation 
(Stachniewski 27):

			Why doth the devil then usurpe on mee?

			Why doth he steale, nay ravish that’s thy right?

			Except thou rise and for thine owne worke fight,

			Oh I shall soone despaire, when I doe see

			That thou lov’st mankind well, yet wilt’not chuse me,

			And Satan hates mee, yet is loth to lose mee.

									(Donne 9-14)

	Line thirteen particularly illuminates Calvinist influence. In these lines, a fear in Donne 
arises that he is one of the forsaken individuals of mankind and that he has not been 
unconditionally elected by God for salvation. Here, in a bout of painful religious doubt, readers 
are allowed a glimpse into the “uncomfortable inwardness” that Donne’s “Holy Sonnets” provide 
concerning the “peculiar [complexity]” of seventeenth-century Christian life, with all its clashing 
theologies (Strier 5). In Holy Sonnet IX, “If poisonous minerals, and if that tree,” Donne relays 
the Calvinist belief that human intellect and reason is utterly insufficient in understanding the 
mind of God:

			Why should intent or reason, borne in mee,

			Make sinnes, else equall, in mee more heinous?

			And mercy being easie, and glorious

			To God; in his sterne wrath, why threatens hee?

			But who am I, that dare dispute with thee

			O God? Oh! …

									(Donne 5-10)

	Here, a question is posed regarding the nature of God, and then the question is left 
completely unanswered by the poem’s persona due to its futility (Stachniewski 20) Lines nine 
and ten echo even further the Calvinist notion that it is absolutely pointless to question the nature 
of God, because one will never receive the understanding they are seeking; it is completely 
impossible to understand God and therefore it is wholly futile to question him. John Calvin, the 
founder of Calvinist theology, explains this Calvinist belief sufficiently: “Why then should you, 
by infatuated inquisitiveness, plunge yourselves into an abyss which reason itself tells you will 
prove your destruction?” (Stachniewski 20). Perhaps the most Calvinist Holy Sonnet of all 
nineteen poems is coincidentally the most contemporarily famous one of all, Holy Sonnet XIV, 
or “Batter my heart, three person’d God; for, you.” In this Holy Sonnet, Donne’s relays a “total 
spiritual dependence” on God (as opposed to his own personal attempts at holiness), a markedly 
Calvinist tenet (Strier 20):

			Batter my heart, three person’d God; for, you

			As yet but knocke, breathe, shine, and seeke to mend,

			That I may rise, and stand, o’erthrow mee,’ and bend

			Your force, to breake, blowe, burn and make me new…

										(Donne 1-4)

	In this opening sequence, Donne suggests he is powerless to affect his own salvation, and 
he pleads with God to forcibly imbue Donne with God’s deliverance (Martin 20). As the poem 
progresses, Donne alludes to the Calvinist notion that God’s grace is absolutely irresistible to 
those God has elected (Martin 20): 

			Divorce mee,’untie, or breake that knot againe,

			Take mee to you, imprison mee, for I

			Except you’enthrall mee, never shall be free,

			Nor ever chast, except you ravish mee.

									(Donne 11-14)

	These final lines of Holy Sonnet XIV seem to convey that either Donne believes he has 
been unconditionally elected, and thus is susceptible to God’s irresistible grace, or that he is 
supremely desirous of being elected, in hopes that by ardently pleading with God for violent, 
spiritual ravishment, God may have mercy and bestow “election” upon him (Martin 21). The 
belief that God may love mankind but not all men, the notion of the futility of questioning God 
through human reasoning, and the tenet of God’s irresistible grace are all elements of Calvinist 
theology that Donne seems to entertain in his personal religiosity, as deduced from close 
inspection of the “Holy Sonnets.”

	Arminian theology, founded by the Dutch theologian Jacobus Arminius, was not nearly 
as prevalent as Anglicanism, Catholicism, or Calvinism in early seventeenth-century Europe, but 
there is at least a few places in the “Holy Sonnets” that seems to suggest its influence upon 
Donne. In many ways, Arminianism can be seen as the direct opposite of Calvinism (Martin 7). 
Whereas Calvinists thought the individual was powerless with regards to their elected salvation, 
Arminians thought, like Catholics, that individuals could achieve their own salvation through 
faith and repentence alone (Martin 7). While Calvinists believed in “irresistible” grace, 
Arminians believed in “resistible” grace, or that God allows salvation for all, but some choose to 
“resist” his grace (Arminianism). And while Calvinists subscribed to the theory of 
predestination, Arminians subscribed to the theory of man’s free will (Arminianism). In this way, 
Arminian theology can be seen as very “inclusive” with regards to salvation, like Catholicism, as 
opposed to Calvinism’s notion of unconditional election (Martin 7). This “inclusiveness” brings 
to mind the final couplet of Holy Sonnet XVIII, “Show me deare Christ, thy Spouse, so bright 
and clear”:  

			And let myne amorous soule court thy mild Dove,

			Who is most trew, and pleasing to thee, then

			When she’is embrac’d and open to most men.

						(Donne 13-14). 

	While this couplet was used earlier to advocate Catholicism’s influence upon Donne, I 
think it is equally fair to suggest this couplet as an example of Arminianism’s influence upon 
Donne because both Catholicism and Arminianism were “open to most men,” in that doctrinally 
they shared the belief that through free will all men were capable of salvation if they so chose to 
have faith in Christ and repent their sins. Another example of Arminian influence upon Donne 
can be found in Holy Sonnet XIX, “Oh, to vex me, contraryes meet in one,” where Donne seems 
to be relaying the Arminian belief in “resistible” grace:

			Oh, to vex me, contraryes meet in one:

			Inconstancy unnaturally hath begot

			A constant habit; that when I would not

			I change in vowes, and in devotione.

								(Donne 1-4)

Here, Donne explains how his devotions waver in intensity, suggesting the Arminian belief that 
God’s grace can be resisted or wavered from due to man’s free will. Perhaps even these 
“contraryes” are the contradictory and clashing elements Donne’s personal religiosity. But to 
continue with regards to Arminianism, Holy Sonnet XV seems to deal with the Arminian notion 
of free will:

			Wilt thou love God, as he thee? then digest,

			My Soule, this wholesome meditation,

			How God the Spirit, by Angels waited on

			In heaven…

								(Donne 1-2)

	The beginning of this sonnet proposes the possibility of choosing or not choosing to 
worship God, echoing the Arminian notions of free will and resistible grace. While it would be 
incorrect to say that Arminianism formed the core of Donne’s spirituality, it is safe to say that 
close inspection of  the “Holy Sonnets” reveals Arminianism’s influence upon Donne’s personal 
religiosity.

	Donne was ordained an Anglican minister in 1615 and was soon thereafter accepted as 
the chaplain of King James I. Although with his ordainment it appears that Donne had embraced 
Anglicanism, it seems he never forgot his Catholic roots and was also influenced by the 
contradictory theologies of Calvinism and Arminianism, which were spreading in influence 
across England and Europe during his life. I assert that the paradoxical nature of Donne’s 
personal religiosity is composed like a reflection of his own renowned metaphysical poetry: 
disparate elements are brought together, complexity proliferates, and beneath its surface lies 
great layered depths. As a great thinker, one can presume that Donne experienced great 
existential anguish in his life with regards to his attempts to come to terms with the nature of 
God and his “mild Dove.” While mentally yoking together such complex combinations of 
different theological implications might be too terrifying for a man of lesser intellect, I believe 
Donne could accept nothing less: for him, if the path to personal religious enlightenment was one 
of terror, anguish, and doubt, then so be it.




Works Cited

"Arminianism." Theopedia. N.p., n.d. Web. 14 Apr. 2013.

"Calvinism: the Doctrines of Grace." Theopedia. N.p., n.d. Web. 12 Apr. 2013.

Donne, John, William Blake, John Hayward, and Geoffrey Keynes. The Complete Poetry and Selected Prose of John Donne & the Complete Poetry of William Blake,. New York: Random House, 1941. Print.

Hanna, Edward. "Contrition." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 4. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1908. 14 Apr. 2013. Web. 

Jokinen, Anniina. "The Life of John Donne (1572-1631)." Luminarium. N.p., 22 June 2006. Web. 14 Apr. 2013.

Martin, Catherine. "Experimental Predestination in Donne's Holy Sonnets: Self-Ministry and the Early Seventeenth-Century "Via Media"" Studies in Philology 110.2 (2013): 350-81. Project Muse. Web. 2013.

McNees, Eleanor. "John Donne and the Anglican Doctrine of the Eucharist." Texas Studies in Literature and Language 29.1 (1987): 94-114. JSTOR. Web. 2013. 

Peterson, Douglas. "John Donne's "Holy Sonnets" and the Anglican Doctrine of Contrition." Studies in Philology 56.3 (1959): 504-18. JSTOR. Web. 2013. 

Rouziek, Miriam. The Yoking Together of Fierce Opposition an Analysis of John Donne’s Holy Sonnets. Thesis. University of Saint Thomas, 2007. N.p.: n.p., n.d. Theophania.net. University of Saint Thomas Department of English. Web. 2013.

Stachniewski, John. "John Donne: The Despair of the "Holy Sonnets"" ELH 48.4 (1981): 677-705. JSTOR. Web. 9 Mar. 2013.

Strier, Richard. "John Donne Awry and Squint: The "Holy Sonnets," 1608-1610." Modern Philology 86.4 (1989): 357. JSTOR. Web. 9 Mar. 2013.
